---
title: The battle against the ANC?
slug: the-battle-against-the-anc
summary: 
date: 2011-11-23
tags:
  - corruption
  - politics
  - power
  - social influence
---
After having passed the "secrecy bill" through parliament yesterday, and with
the Mac Maharaj fiasco, a whole range of ridiculing, "naming-and-shaming",
gossip-like articles and public comments/jokes have been popping up:

  * ["Black Tuesday": There's more where that came from](http://dailymaverick.co.za/article/2011-11-23-black-tuesday-theres-more-where-that-came-from)
  * [Evading the questions with Big Mac](http://mg.co.za/article/2011-11-22-evading-the-questions-with-big-mac)
  * [Info bill: who voted how](http://www.news24.com/SouthAfrica/Politics/Info-bill-Who-voted-how-20111122) (the names will surely be publicised today) 
  * [ANC smiling over "Secrecy Bill"](http://www.iol.co.za/news/politics/anc-smiling-over-secrecy-bill-1.1184173) (think about the headline) 
  * [Zapiro cartoon: Black Tuesday and the end of democracy in South Africa](http://www.zapiro.com/cartoon/589725-111122tt)
  * [Zapiro cartoon: Dr Jacob and Mr Hide](http://www.zapiro.com/cartoon/586502-111120st)
  * [Twitter #SecrecyBill](http://twitter.com/#!/search/%23SecrecyBill)

The first thing that popped into my mind was this: according to what we know
about [social influence](http://thanethomson.com/2011/11/11/power-and-
business/ "Power, and business" ) (a.k.a. power), there are two major
mechanisms that society uses to remove it. Those mechanisms are **_gossip_**
and **_ridicule_**. The moment we perceive those in power to not be acting in
our interests any more we employ these mechanisms, and from the little I can
see at the moment, it would seem as though the middle/upper class in South
Africa is using them against the ANC. (The middle/upper class minority is
generally the only group with access to this sort of media and voice in South
Africa at the moment - and you will see clearly from the people commenting on
the various news articles that it is no longer just "white" people who make up
this group).

Some of the most prominent spokespeople and organisations in South Africa are
also chiming in:

  * [Secrecy Bill Insults South Africans - Desmond Tutu](http://www.eyewitnessnews.co.za/Story.aspx?Id=77882)
  * [Protection of State Information Bill - an expression of concern from the Mandela Centre of Memory](http://www.nelsonmandela.org/index.php/news/article/protection_of_state_information_bill_an_expression_of_concern/)
  * [Secrecy and Tyranny - Helen Suzman Foundation](http://www.hsf.org.za/)
  * [Business urges rethink on secrecy bill - Business Unity South Africa](http://www.fin24.com/Economy/Business-urges-rethink-on-secrecy-bill-20111122)
  * [Statement by Media Monitoring Africa](http://hosted-p0.vresp.com/184426/8b1cf0d5b3/ARCHIVE)

It will be interesting to watch how things play out here. The middle/upper
class minority doesn't have much by way of voter might, but what else does
this minority control? How else can it flex its own power? Nothing draws a
disjoint, individualistic society like our middle/upper class together like a
common enemy. The media just might have the influence to be able to co-
ordinate this.

Although, we do have a reputation for sitting comfortably and quietly behind
our 3m-high walls, security gates and laser beams inside our security estates
when the going gets tough (largely because we feel our actions won't make any
difference whatsoever, saying: "who are we to go up against the under-educated
masses who vote for whichever politician sings the best tune or dances the
best dance?"). We point out that the ANC [constantly acts against the
interests of those who voted them into power and those most vulnerable in
society](http://www.businessday.co.za/Articles/Content.aspx?id=159255). (By
the way, if they're not acting in the interests of the masses, and the
minorities are also indicating, by way of gossip and ridicule as pointed out,
that the ANC is not acting in their interests, [in whose interests is the ANC
really
acting](http://www.businessday.co.za/articles/Content.aspx?id=159349)?). We
sit and gossip to each other about how little the government actually works
for us, and recount hundreds of tales of incompetence, and of being
inconvenienced and insulted. We complain about paying relatively exorbitant
taxes in exchange for poor or non-existent service delivery. We're tired of
hearing about how [R20 of every R100 in our hard-earned taxpayer money goes to
greasing the palms of corrupt politicians and public
servants](http://dailymaverick.co.za/article/2011-11-23-black-tuesday-theres-
more-where-that-came-from) - and how they're now, with a "secrecy bill", going
to be able to legally cover it up (an opinion which, admittedly, [might just
be blown out of proportion at the
moment](http://www.businessday.co.za/Articles/Content.aspx?id=159255)). We
then still live in blissful ignorance, telling ourselves: "don't worry,
everything's going to carry on just as it's always carried on".

Perhaps, by the time we're moved by worsening circumstances to take any
serious action, leveraging our collective influence, it will be too late.

