---
title: Business, complexity and emergence
slug: business-complexity-and-emergence
summary: 
date: 2011-11-14
tags:
  - business
  - complexity
  - emergence
  - philosophy
---
In trying to understand business in new ways, it seems as though a variety of
authors (academic and non-academic) have been trying to apply perspectives
from a relatively new "branch" of science that is still busy taking shape:
that of _emergence_. The concept of emergence comes from a variety of
different streams of thought.

Jeffrey Goldstein wrote a paper in 1999 entitled [_Emergence as a construct:
history and issues_](http://www.wu.ac.at/am/Download/ae/Issue_1-1.pdf) where
he outlined, from his research, the development of the idea of "emergence" in
the literature, and one of the best visual representations of this is in the
following picture.

[![](http://thanethomson.com/wp-
content/uploads/2011/11/goldstein.png)](http://thanethomson.com/wp-
content/uploads/2011/11/goldstein.png)**Mathematical and scientific roots of
emergence (Goldstein, 1999, p 55)**

Goldstein defines "emergence" as follows (p 49).

> Emergence is the arising of novel and coherent structures, patterns and
properties during the process of self-organisation in complex systems.

What exactly does that mean?



###  A waterproof raft, made of fire ants?

[This article](http://www.underwatertimes.com/news.php?article_id=48176391025)
on fire ants will serve as a good example of emergence. If you place a single
fire ant in water, it will most likely struggle tremendously, and possibly
drown. The moment the water levels start rising under a whole bunch of fire
ants, however, they "miraculously" cling together forming a waterproof raft!
Fascinating stuff. The new patterns arise only during self-organisation.

What's really fascinating about it is this: there's no central commander (or
CEO) ordering the construction of the boat.

The construction of the boat simply "happens" or "emerges" as a result of the
much simpler properties of each of the ants: each ant's body is somewhat
water-repellent, and so when enough of them get together a raft forms that can
carry them off to safety.



###  New perspectives on society

This is why emergence is such an important concept in understanding ourselves,
because all of us together (i.e.
[society](http://thanethomson.com/2011/11/10/mind-self-and-society/ "Mind,
self and society" )) seem to constitute a very complex, interdependent
"system" of some sorts. If the "raft" is an emergent pattern of behaviour in
the fire ant community, what sorts of emergent patterns of behaviour do we
exhibit?

Then, what are the much simpler properties that we all exhibit on an
individual level that, combined, produce these emergent effects? This second
question becomes very important because that could possibly give us clues as
to how to change our individual behaviour in order to affect the emergent
consequences affecting society as a whole.

A simple example of what I see to be emergence in our society would be that of
a traffic jam where there's no apparent reason for it.

  1. Person 1 goes around a bend on the highway without much trouble, but slows down ever so slightly as she does. 
  2. Person 2, who is following person 1 quite closely, brakes a bit to compensate for person 1's slowing down. 
  3. Person 3 sees person 2 braking from a bit of a distance away and so brakes as well to compensate, but brakes a little longer than person 2 does because person 3 is cautious and wants to make sure that he has braked enough to be safe. 
  4. Persons 4 and 5 see person 3 braking, and so brake just a little more and ever so slightly little longer than person 3. 
  5. And so onâ€¦

Eventually, given enough people on the highway, the _emergent phenomenon_ is
that we all sit still in a _traffic jam_. What caused the traffic jam? Not an
accident, not any one particular driver's stupidity, but the _cumulative
effects of our tendencies to over-compensate when braking to ensure safety_.

Who's to blame?

We all are.



###  New perspectives, new types of business

Within the realm of business, this whole idea of emergence brings up some
really interesting questions. For example, is it possible to have a whole
bunch of people working together on meaningful stuff, creating real value for
people, without needing any centralised control?

If so, what are the individual-level characteristics that we need to develop
to facilitate this type of "organising"?

I can't answer these questions yet, and it might be some years before we can
effectively answer them, but it seems as though Ricardo Semler has made
significant steps towards this sort of organising (see [this talk by
Semler](http://mitworld.mit.edu/video/308)).



###  New perspectives on traditional business

Not only could an understanding of our collective, emergent properties as a
society give us new perspectives on how to organise, but it could also help us
explain much of what's happening in the world around us today.

For me, thinking of the way in which business currently runs (the
"traditional" models of business, following the traditional rules and
patterns), what are the emergent properties of society today caused by the
traditional rules, such as imposing hierarchies, incentive schemes, salary
structures, etc.?

Is there really a team of evil conspirators pulling strings behind the scenes,
or could our current financial and economic crises be _emergent_ effects of
far simpler rules that we've imposed upon ourselves?

Like I said, I don't have answers to these questions yet, but I would love to
do some more digging in the years to come.



###  Into the future

As the world gets more and more interconnected and interdependent, we need to
start understanding and researching the _holistic_ consequences of our
interconnectedness and interdependencies. Otherwise we might end up doing
things which on an individual level look absolutely harmless, but on a
collective level bring society to a grinding halt.

