---
title: Validity - a tale of disillusionment
slug: validity-a-tale-of-disillusionment
summary:
date: 2011-11-21
tags:
  - philosophy
  - social constructionism
  - truth
  - validity
---
In digging around for different people's understandings of social
constructionist philosophy for my thesis, I discovered this great journal
article by Steinar Kvale (1995) entitled [_The social construction of
validity_](http://qix.sagepub.com/content/1/1/19.short). What I was trying to
do in my thesis was get back to some of our fundamental assumptions about
social phenomena, and in doing so, I was drawn much further down the rabbit
hole than I expected: I eventually had to start delving into _our
understanding about the ways in which we understand_.



###  Correspondence, coherence and pragmatic utility

Kvale writes of a number of perspectives on _validity_ and _truth_, where the
most precise definitions seem to contain some measure of _correspondence_,
_coherence_ and _pragmatic utility_. Traditionally, _valid_ or _true_
statements exhibit all three.

  * Correspondence - does the statement/knowledge correspond to objective reality? (Think: realism, positivism, pretty much most of modern science).
  * Coherence - does the statement/knowledge have some sort of logical, internal consistency? (Think: mathematics).
  * Pragmatic utility - can we actually use the statement/knowledge in some practical way? (Think: pragmatism).

Especially from a postmodernist point of view, saying that a statement
_corresponds_ to reality is highly dubious. (See [this lecture by Rick
Roderick on Derrida's work](http://rickroderick.org/307-derrida-and-the-ends-
of-man-1993/)). The view that correspondence is a real possibility is known as
a _positivist view_, which says that reality can be known directly. For most
people's everyday practical purposes, this is certainly not a bad world view -
people seem to have gotten by just fine on this view for ages.

It's only when slightly odd people (such as myself) start asking too many
questions, drawing them into the details, that this view starts to unravel:

> **This apple I'm eating is really sweet. I wonder what it's made of?**

>

> _A variety of different types of cells_.

>

> **Hmmm, interesting. What are those cells made of?**

>

> _Molecules, which are made up of atoms._

>

> **Cool. But what are atoms made of?**

>

> _Subatomic particles: protons, neutrons and electrons. And those are most
likely made up of quarks._

>

> **Wow, I didn't know quarks could be so tasty! What're quarks made of?**

>

> _We don't really know, but we've got a couple of theories about what they
could be made of._

>

> **Wait a minute… So what the hell am I eating?**

>

> _Good question. Nobody really knows. Like I said, we've got some theories…  
>  _



###  Reductionism and correspondence

The [reductionists](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Reductionism) hope that by
isolating smaller and smaller bits of things we'll eventually come up with a
true description of "objective reality", i.e. correspondence. They obviously
haven't read Sapolsky and Balt's paper entitled _Reductionism and Variability
in Data: a Meta-Analysis_ (published in _Perspectives in Biology and
Medicine_, 39(2), 1996 - I had to personally contact [Professor
Sapolsky](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Robert_Sapolsky) to get hold of a copy
of it).

One of the major assumptions in reductionist philosophy is that "noise" or
variability in experimental data will vanish as we get closer and closer to
"objective reality" by examining finer and finer levels detail. In Sapolsky
and Balt's paper, they test this assumption: they gathered many years' papers
on the subject of testosterone and aggression and organised them into six
"levels": organismal, organ systems, single organs, multicellular, single-
cellular, and sub-cellular papers. They then catalogued the variability in
each and every paper, plotting the six levels' variability against each other.

The expectation: a decreasing trend in variation as they zoomed in more.

The result: _no observable trend_.

The interpretation: reductionism is helpful, but only to a certain extent. At
this point, your options pretty much include moving on to chaos/complexity
theory. You've come too far down the rabbit hole to go back to positivist
thinking.



###  Conclusion

For many practical purposes, however, we can talk of apples and the effects of
testosterone on primate behaviour, but _practical purposes _are something
quite different to _correspondence_. As for coherence, that's a topic for
another day, because I'd have to convince you that mathematics, similar to
English, is just another language, rooted in and emergent from interaction
between people in society (see [this blog
article](http://thanethomson.com/2011/11/10/mind-self-and-society/ "Mind, self
and society" )).

Going forward, I've given up on being able to expound "what things are", and
especially on being able to write "truth" down or speak about it. Instead, I'm
focusing much of my energy on discovering/coming up with relatively stable
guiding narratives (knowledge, statements, etc.) that I will test and put to
practical use in different contexts, tweaking the narratives depending on the
desired results - my personal view of what research should be.

We can't hold on to the promise that someone's going to give us the ultimate
answer. I think we've each got to seek it out for ourselves, relentlessly and
carefully questioning our own and others' internal assumptions.
