---
title: Mind, self and society
slug: mind-self-and-society
summary:
date: 2011-11-10
tags:
  - mead
  - philosophy
  - social constructionism
  - symbolic interactionism
---
I suppose tons of work has been done in coming to an understanding of the
development of language, individuality and society, but I would like to describe
here the views of an American philosopher, sociologist and psychologist named
[George Herbert Mead](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/George_Herbert_Mead). His
most prominent work was a piece of the same title as this post: _Mind, self and
society_ (1934).

The main theory that he came up with is _symbolic interactionism_, parts of
which I describe in this article. To me it seems to be a very pragmatic way of
looking at the development of language, an individual sense of self, and
society as a whole - both in terms of the historical evolution of those
phenomena, as well as how we learn language, develop a sense of self and form
society today.


###  Meaning

[Filipe Carreira da Silva](http://www.polity.co.uk/book.asp?ref=9780745634579)
gives a pretty decent, simple overview of Mead's works, and most of my
insights come from da Silva's work. Let me give a run-down of how I see
symbolic interactionism working in contemporary society.

A child is born with certain instincts (we won't go into too much detail
there). So, for example, the child might experience a certain kind of
discomfort, in response to which the child instinctively cries. If this cry (a
"gesture", in Mead's terminology) is followed by food from her mother and thus
satisfaction (the "response"), the meaning we eventually attribute to this
interplay of gestures and responses is _hunger_.

The meanings of things, therefore, are _constructed_. Meaning is not something
that is inherent in our daily lives - it is something that we create in our
minds and in our interactions with one another. This has tremendous
implications for language as a whole: for example, Derrida noted that the
meaning of a word is altered with every single use of that word, over time.
Each word stands on top of this massive "pile" of meaning then, constructed,
morphed and tweaked over the ages.

A practical example of this would be the word "dog". I'm quite sure that the
first thing that comes to your mind when you read that word is something not
exactly the same as in my mind: you might envision a small, white dog, or a
large, brown one, whereas I would envisage a black one. My experiences with
dogs would be linked to my internal representation of "dog", and your
experiences would most likely be linked to your internal representation of the
word "dog". An understanding of how our brains are wired seems to give a
little understanding as to why our associations would be subtly different:
each and every human brain is uniquely wired.

Some people say that each neuron in our brains is wired to between
[7,000](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Neuron#Connectivity) and 10,000 other
neurons. We also apparently have 100 billion neurons in our brains. That's a
lot of interconnectivity: interconnectivity that's nudged and tweaked
continuously by tiny processes every second of every day, from when we're born
to when we die.

Surely it's not possible then to share meaning precisely? If I read a piece of
text, I might get a relatively similar understanding of it to you, but there
doesn't seem to be any chance that we will interpret it in _exactly_ the same
way. I will hopefully cover the implications of this when I write about the
systemic way of thinking.


###  Self

In our super-individualistic society today, it seems as though the common
picture of society is that it's a group of individuals - that is, we all
develop rather independently, and come together to form society.

Mead thinks of it the other way round. He said that it is society which exists
_prior_ to the individual, and the individual is first formed by society, and
then goes on to form and be formed by society. Let me explain with an example.

When a child is born, he soaks up stimuli like a little sponge. He learns
simple behaviours and starts mimicking sounds made by his parents (who are
part of society).

At a later stage, the child starts to play. The child, for example, pretends
to be a cop, and a friend pretends to be a robber, and they chase each other
round the garden pretending to shoot each other. Let's look at what happens
here: the child pretending to be the cop, in Mead's words, "takes on the
attitude" of the cop. In other words, the child has some kind of built-up
picture of what a cop is and does (potentially from watching movies or reading
stories or seeing them in everyday life), and acts out from that perspective -
making decisions as if he were a cop, in his understanding of how a cop would
make decisions. A similar dynamic occurs with the friend who pretends to be
the robber.

At some point, the child also begins to engage in more complex social
behaviour involving co-ordination amongst several other people. A classic
example of this used by [Mead (1925, p 269)](http://www.jstor.org/pss/2377274)
is a baseball game:

> The child must not only take the role of the other, as he does in play, but
he must assume the various roles of all the participants in the game, and
govern his action accordingly. If he plays first base, it is as the one to
whom the ball will be thrown from the field or from the catcher. Their
organised reactions to him he has imbedded in his own playing of the different
positions, and this organised reaction becomes what I have called the
"generalised other" that accompanies and controls his conduct. And it is this
generalised other in his experience which provides him with a self.

According to Mead, every group has its own "generalised other", which I see as
an "average" or "sum total" or "least common denominator" of sorts containing
the attitudes of that group. Strong examples of this would be stereotypes:
"blondes", "car mechanics", "cat lovers", "men", "women". Do you have the
inherent ability to pin down a few attributes of each of these groups of
people? If so, you've built up generalised others in interaction with them
over time.

The child, in reflecting his actions off of other people and groups as he
develops, constructs a sense of self such that he can say: "I am a [X] type of
person". He can list his attributes in comparison to other individuals and
groups, and is eventually capable of _self-awareness_. The _conversations_
between him and society have built up a _self_.


###  Mind

Given this understanding of the development of the self, what is your mind
then? This is certainly quite a complex thing to answer, because it's affected
by so many things right down to the biology of your brain and body.

According to Mead, the phenomenon of mind is simply _conversation_ with
generalised others that have been internalised. In other words, we talk to the
"blondes", "car mechanics", "cat lovers", and so on, or even generalisations
of specific individuals, in our minds. We build up pictures of who we think
other individuals or groups of people are, and then we often rehearse
conversations with them in our minds prior to seeing them, trying to establish
what we think their responses will be. Society as a whole, also, will have a
_generalised other_ in your mind - in case you ever have to communicate with
the whole of humanity.


###  "I" and "me"

There's something rather mysterious in this whole conception of mind and self
by Mead. Let me illustrate.

Think of the last time you had lunch. Imagine viewing yourself while you were
eating. What were you thinking of? Who were you at that point?

Two questions are posed.

1. Who is it that you're looking at in your mind's eye?
2. What's doing the looking?

Mead conceptualises the self as having two phases: the "I" and the "me"
phases. In answering the first question, Mead says that this is your "me"
phase of self, or _object self_ - the one constructed in interaction with
society over time. As for the second question, Mead calls this the "I" phase
of your self, or _subject self_.

Note how you can't ever really look at your "I" phase. Every time you think of
yourself, you think in terms of the object version of your self, or your "me"
phase - your "I" phase is always actively doing the looking, and any thinking
about your self is done retrospectively. David Bohm (I wrote a bit about his
work in [this article](https://thanethomson.com/2011/11/08/reality-as-process/))
seems, to me at least, to speak of the "I" phase of self
as being part of the immeasurable, and is thus rather mysterious.

Another interesting thing about the "I" and "me" phases of self is that
different people seem to live more through the one than the other. The vast
majority of people seem to live through the "me" phase of their selves:
they're the people who are rather predictable, who can tell you exactly who
they are and that they know themselves well.

Da Silva gives some examples of people throughout history whose "I" phase of
self was very strong, such as Buddha, Jesus and Socrates. Such individuals are
apparently more likely to be unpredictable and often act from an unknown (and
possibly unknowable) source. Mead says that the "I" phase of self is a source
of novelty and thus creativity. The stronger your "I" phase of self, the more
powerfully you could potentially change a group of people (think of the impact
that individuals such as Buddha, Jesus and Socrates have had on modern
society).

Everyone else is somewhere in between being creative and predictable.


###  Social control

Social control then need not be something forced upon people - society and
sub-groups within society already implicitly control those whose "me" phases
are strong. They act according to who they think they are, but who they think
they are is simply a product of the groups that have influenced them the most.
We all suffer from this to a certain degree, and it's not necessarily a bad
thing.

People who don't conform to the group often get ostracised, and as Malcolm
Gladwell points out at the beginning of
[_Outliers_](http://amzn.com/0316017922), it seems as though we need a certain
amount of community to be healthy. Erich Fromm, in
[_The Fear of Freedom_](http://amzn.com/0415253888), noted that life seems to
be a trade-off between individuality and community.

How does this control look? It's actually quite simple. When you're thinking
of doing something, if you start thinking it's a bad idea, often it's because
the "generalised other" of the person or persons who will be affected by this
action say it's a bad idea, so you don't do it. Or, something fits quite well
with your conception of who you think you are (your "me" construction), and so
you do it (you're the kind of person who likes to go for long walks on the
beach, so you go for a long walk on the beach, but you wouldn't consider going
for a quick run because you're not that kind of person). This kind of social
control is thus a form of _self-criticism_.


###  Society

"Society" then is defined by Mead (from da Silva, p 61) as

> the organised set of responses individuals can use for the purposes of
social control - which … operates in terms of self-criticism.

Krishnamurti, who apparently influenced and was influenced by David Bohm,
wrote about society in
[_The First and Last Freedom_](http://amzn.com/0060648317) (p 36):

> The act of relationship between you and another, between you and me, is
society.

So, "society" is a
[blanket term](https://thanethomson.com/2011/11/09/blanket-terms-hiding-the-truth/)
that we use to describe the complex network of relationships between all of us,
each of us seeming to have an "I" and "me" phase to our selves, where the
majority of us act according to the "me" phase (for a variety of reasons, of
course). Thus, we allow dominant groups to influence our thinking.

If two groups are vying for your attention, what is it that will cause you to
allow one of them to influence you and not the other? Surely it's the amount of
power you perceive them to have over you? I'll hopefully write a bit about power
and social influence soon.


###  Conclusion

I hope you've managed to stomach this rather philosophical article. I find it
all very interesting, and I will hopefully tie this together with a few of my
other articles (and some yet to be written) to show why this is all important
in present-day society. In the meantime, I hope you see, as I do, the
potential value of Mead's relatively practical framework in coming to
understand present-day society and societal patterning.
