---
title: The trouble with systems
slug: the-trouble-with-systems
summary: 
date: 2011-11-25
tags:
  - complexity
  - consumerism
  - emergence
  - philosophy
  - systemic perspective
---
We have this tendency to want to make our lives easier - perhaps this is a
built-in biological mechanism to conserve energy? So we've been constructing
_systems_ for ages now: all the way from cars to supercomputers to money-
making "systems" that we call _organisations_. Many people who give advice to
entrepreneurs tell them to try to set up "systems" in the company so that they
can eventually work themselves out of a job - the "system" is then to just run
itself, bringing in "passive income" every month for the entrepreneur.



###  The production line

Think of a modern manufacturing line: the line assembles one or more types of
products, and today it's possible to have the line do so with very little
human interaction at all, except for the occasional programming and
maintenance. We then churn out as many products as there is demand in order to
make a profit.

[![](http://thanethomson.com/wp-
content/uploads/2011/11/robots.jpg)](http://thanethomson.com/wp-
content/uploads/2011/11/robots.jpg)

**Figure 1. Car production/assembly line**

Many web-based businesses are set up like this too: think
[Facebook](http://www.facebook.com/), [Google](http://www.google.com/),
[Groupon](http://www.groupon.com/), etc. And with artificial intelligence,
we're [most likely going to start needing even less human
intervention](http://www.economist.com/blogs/babbage/2011/02/artificial_intelligence).
The only time human beings are really needed on the business side is when
things go wrong, or one needs to do things that are outside of the system's
programming, or one needs to teach someone else how to use the system.

The nice things about systems are that, in general, they can be _controlled_,
they can be _optimised_ (see [_The Goal_ by E.
Goldratt](http://amzn.com/0884270610)), and, if set up properly, you don't
need highly skilled people (like the original developers of the system) to
watch over the operation of the system. It's only in times of serious crisis
that the original developers are called back in. This is certainly appealing,
especially when it means being able to cut your operating costs, developing
economies of scale, to the point that the money just rolls in without you, as
the original architect, having to lift a finger.



###  The organisation as a system

Many people advocate looking at an organisation holistically as a system (for
example, [Peter Senge's _Fifth Discipline_](http://amzn.com/0385260954)) - one
whose purpose is to produce profit. So we come up with elaborate
organisational designs and incentive schemes to encourage the various "parts"
of the system (i.e. you and me) to act in such a way that the whole system
produces this profit. We even try to get the organisation as a whole to
["learn"](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Learning_Organizations_%28Peter_Senge%29).
Often, the long-term aim of the entrepreneur who establishes such a system is
to reduce the organisation's dependence on him.

[![](http://thanethomson.com/wp-content/uploads/2011/11/org-
chart-300x233.jpg)](http://thanethomson.com/wp-content/uploads/2011/11/org-
chart.jpg)

**Figure 2. Traditional organisational chart**

The appeal of this kind of perspective, at least in theory, is clear: the
smartest person (the entrepreneur) designs the money-making machine, putting
all the necessary cogs, wheels, etc. (the "not-so-smart" or highly specialised
employees) in place and connecting them in appropriate ways (hierarchies,
incentive schemes, etc.), and the entrepreneur cracks the whip (in whatever
form that may be) to get them to work together. Out pops a continual stream of
profits, and the entrepreneur plays golf all day and goes on long, frequent
overseas holidays. (Note: "entrepreneur" here could also refer rather to
"shareholders").

Of course, the employees are not so dumb any more, and they know when they're
being taken for a ride, so we've established all sorts of elaborate
psychological schemes (read here: human resource management, internal
branding, team-building, etc.) to basically trick people into thinking that
"the company really cares". Sure it does: if its cogs break down, the stream
of profit stops, and the shareholders have to cut their overseas holidays
short to come home and fix the system.



###  Not everyone's a greedy, profit-hungry blighter

Not all companies, I admit, are solely focused on profit - many of them have
products or services which are truly beneficial to humanity. But seriously, do
we really _need_ another iPad? [Click here for a
pictures](http://heartacheinafrica.blogspot.com/p/in-eye-of-beholder.html) of
what need looks like. Surely we should all be working together towards fixing
this?

Some companies do a lot of good. The non-profit arm of a company I used to
work for, the [Praekelt Foundation](http://www.praekeltfoundation.org/), is
using technology in novel ways that's helping solve serious social issues. I'm
sure there's a whole range of other companies out there trying really hard to
do similar things.



###  People are getting smarter

Back to the systemic perspective. So it's all fine and well when you've got a
simple product line with a relatively stable demand and a work force that's
happy with being kept unempowered in exchange for a mere pittance of a salary.
What happens though when the people you employ, as an entrepreneur with this
systemic perspective, are smarter than you? Perhaps they'll find ways around
your incentive schemes and systems to screw you over? Perhaps they'll figure
out how to start a company just like yours, only better? You'll probably end
up regretting that you treated them like idiots or in ways that made it seem
as though you were stepping on them.



###  Markets are shifting more rapidly

Not only is the composition of the "organisation" changing, but people are
getting smarter (especially in first-world countries), the amount of consumer
choice that we have is growing at a dizzying rate, and attention spans are
shortening (largely, I think, due to social media and a lack of discipline in
its use), so it's becoming increasingly difficult to keep people satisfied.
Their wants and desires are becoming ever-more fickle, and so the days of
setting up production lines that pump out hundreds of thousands of black
model-T Fords are most likely over.

The trouble with the system in this case is that even though the market
shifts, the system stays facing the same way it was "programmed" to face. If
this system is a monstrous organisation with 100,000 employees, and its
product or service demand shifts significantly and rapidly enough, imagine the
upheaval and distress this would cause! (And the obscene sums of money made by
change management consultants in the process of trying to get everyone to work
in the new direction).



###  Towards new ways of organising

We need to start looking at new ways of organising. A friend of mine pointed
me towards this site this morning: <http://unboss.com/>. "UnBoss yourself" is
the idea behind it. Quite a simple, powerful idea, but I think it's rather
impractical when you're part of a completely under-educated work force and
can't do much more than drill holes, wield a spanner and phone the engineers
when things go wrong (like huge numbers of people in many factor- and
efficiency-driven economies).

Newer ways of organising, such as that seen in
[Semco](http://mitworld.mit.edu/video/308) and most likely advocated by
UnBoss, as far as I can currently see, are most likely only applicable to a
highly educated, skilled work force. These are much "flatter", more networked,
_emergent_ approaches to organising together. These models assume that the
people in these networks can think for themselves - at least to a certain
degree, and with at least some individual and collective creativity.

The trouble, I think, comes in with people who cannot yet think critically,
and have been oppressed and suppressed and disempowered by the "system" for so
long that it would be a mammoth task to free them. I know for a fact that
public schooling in South Africa is downright broken at the moment, with us
being ranked 127th out of 142 countries in the [2011-2012 Global
Competitiveness Report](http://reports.weforum.org/global-
competitiveness-2011-2012/) in terms of the quality of our primary school
education, and 133rd in terms of the quality of our overall education system.
How are we going to be relevant in 20 years' time as a global player if things
keep going this way?



###  In conclusion

Don't get me wrong, I'm all for an appropriately-placed and appropriately-
maintained system. We need to admit to ourselves the limitations of these
systems though, as well as what we, as humanity, can truly control.

I think that the economy of the future is going to struggle to incorporate
docile employees with very specific skill sets such as just Java programming
or bookkeeping. We are going to need people who can think critically and
creatively for themselves, on top of having a variety of useful, practical
skills, and who can network both in the real and the virtual worlds. All of
our education systems are most likely going to have to change and evolve to
facilitate this. This, I think, is as close to a definition of "true
empowerment" that I can get, given our current context.

Not only this, but we will have to rethink our work - that is, what we do on a
daily basis - and the ways in which we organise together to accomplish this
work.

