---
title: Power, and business
slug: power-and-business
summary: 
date: 2011-11-11
tags:
  - complexity
  - emergence
  - philosophy
  - power
  - questions
  - social influence
---
Keltner, Van Kleef, Chen and Kraus wrote a really interesting paper in 2008 on
social power entitled [_A reciprocal influence model of social
power_](http://socrates.berkeley.edu/~keltner/publications/keltner.advances.2008.pdf),
and I think that, against the backdrop of emergence and complexity theory and
social influence theory, we're only beginning to scratch the surface as to
society's dynamics in business research (an opinion I'm open to having
challenged).



###  Foundations

The authors had two fundamental assumptions (p 152) regarding social influence
that they took from an evolutionary perspective in primate hierarchies, as
follows.

  1. Power relations are bi-directional, and are governed according to the extent to which individuals act in ways that advance the interests of the group. 
  2. Power is a [heuristic](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Heuristic) solution to the problem of allocating resources in interdependent relations, and as such, should be a basic dimension of social perception and social behaviour. 

Interesting. Seems rather plausible and pragmatic to me, I think. I'd like to
investigate these assumptions more deeply at some point though - especially
the second one. Let's assume for a while that this is how things work right
now, because the authors do distil these assumptions into 7 propositions (p
157) that are all proven to a degree by experimental evidence.

So, we, the people, give particular individuals or groups of individuals power
if they further our interests (or at least appear to further our interests).
Democratic elections would be an example of this. If one candidate or
political party keeps shouting about how they are going to address your
interests, and the other candidates/parties don't, surely you're going to be
more likely to vote for that candidate/party? You're going to give them
authority over you to provide the necessary frameworks in which you will live
and you'll hope that, working and living within those frameworks, you'll have
your particular interests addressed (unemployment, healthcare, education,
etc.).

Not only this, but we progressively (heuristically) give power to and take it
from the relevant people who will be allocating resources, and we give to and
take from them the relevant resources. Money, in my mind, would be one such
resource, amongst others such as tangible resources (water, food, machinery,
etc.) or even possibly intangible ones (our time, intellectual property,
etc.).

Surely then, when theorising about "business", we need to do so against the
backdrop of an understanding of the dynamics of social influence? In my brief
bit of research so far in the field of entrepreneurship, I haven't seen much
talk of this - people mainly seem to focus on innovation, and gathering
resources towards addressing an opportunity. The social influence dynamics
behind this seem taken for granted (perhaps I haven't read enough yet - I am
certainly open to being corrected).



###  Business and power

The way I see things is as follows: if you create some kind of value (a
product, service, experience, etc.) that a particular group of people wants
(call them your "target audience"), and they're willing to give you a certain
amount of money for your offering, and if once you've paid all of your bills
and delivered on your promises you've got some money left over, you've got a
business - especially if you can keep this going. But that money that you've
got left over: what is it? From one perspective, one could think of it as
_purchasing power_. Useful resources, that afford you freedom and a certain
degree of influence (not the only type of influence in society, I might add),
have been allocated to you by the group - not necessarily consciously, but
perhaps as a built-in mechanism in society (see [this other article I wrote on
Mead's view of society](http://thanethomson.com/2011/11/10/mind-self-and-
society/ "Mind, self and society" )). Is this perhaps an _emergent effect_ of
some simpler, more fundamental things that you and I do on a daily basis?
Entirely possible, I think.

What do you then do with those resources? Do you re-invest them in creating
more value for society (i.e. that which society at least _perceives_ as being
valuable)? If so, it's likely that you'll be able to carry on gaining
_purchasing power_. Do you waste them on things that only further your own
interests and nobody else's (even perhaps working _against_ the interests of
others)? If so, you'd better hope that nobody finds out, because if the group
sees you as wasteful (think: [Lehman
Brothers](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Lehman_Brothers), _et al._) they will
at least try to find ways (consciously or subconsciously) to remove your power
from you (think: [_Occupy Wall
Street_](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Occupy_Wall_Street)).

(Just to clarify, from my phrasing above: I don't at all think the _Occupy
Wall Street_ movement had anything to do with Lehman Brothers' swift descent,
but its emergence after the financial crisis seems to me to be a growing
signal of societal discontent with the corporate gestures made by those
currently in power, who wield much of humanity's resources. Although it's a
very scattered movement filled with discord, to me it's a sign that growing
parts of society are not having their interests taken seriously by those who
have historically been afforded power, and are looking for new ways of having
their needs met, and perhaps new authorities).



###  Power, and business

So it seems to me as though social influence dynamics (under the two
assumptions by Keltner _et al._) are at the heart of what drives business.
Power is thus a primary construct to understanding the present-day phenomenon
which we call "business". "Business", as we currently understand it, is, in
language more amenable to complexity theory and emergence, a form of _societal
patterning_.

With this understanding, what other sorts of societal patterning are possible
towards creating _real value_?



###  The perception of value

As you might have seen, I'm quite careful when talking about the way in which
society affords power to those who at least _appear_ to create value for them.
I think that it's entirely possible to fool people into thinking that you're
creating value (think again: Lehman Brothers, _et al._). The problem is, if
you're not creating _real value_, it will eventually surface in some form of
deficiency or chasm somewhere. In the most extreme case, it might even surface
in societal collapse and extinction of the species.

So far we've been lucky: all of the major collapses and scandals have been
relatively small-scale in comparison to total extinction, and the aftermath is
quite clearly a removal of power from those who instigated the societal harm.

A question comes to my mind then: what is _real value_?

Depending on how you look at it, this is either a very easy or very difficult
thing to answer, and I think that the answer lies in your fundamental frame of
reference. Do you consider long-term survival of humanity, attempting to
progressively improve the quality of life of all people, as a worthwhile goal?
If so, then I would say that whatever contributes (no matter how small the
contribution might seem) towards this dynamic, running goal would constitute
_real value_. What's your definition of _real value_?



###  Implications and questions

Surely we need to start thinking more carefully about the ways in which we
afford power to others, allowing them to mould and shape us according to their
thinking and desires? Going back to [symbolic interactionist
theory](http://thanethomson.com/2011/11/10/mind-self-and-society/ "Mind, self
and society" ), it seems, to me at least, as though our unwillingness to part
with our constructed selves (the "me" phases of self) traps us in being
controlled _from within_ by influential people and groups.

What sort of society would be possible if we all allowed ourselves and others
to be a bit more spontaneous, living creatively "in the moment"?

And finally, we need to bolster the postmodern movement, which is essentially
a sceptical movement, by continually interrogating our own motives and those
of others. We need to start crafting and asking the right questions, towards
creating _real value_ for each other.

