---
title: Reality as process
slug: reality-as-process
summary:
date: 2011-11-08
tags:
  - philosophy
  - process
---
In doing some background reading for my thesis, a friend of mine gave me a book
by [David Bohm](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/David_Bohm) entitled
"[Wholeness and the Implicate Order](http://amzn.com/0415119669)". Esoteric?
Definitely. Difficult to read? Incredibly. Worth the effort? Absolutely.

Bohm, as per the Wikipedia entry, was quite an impressive physicist. The idea
he put forward was quite simple, although it's presented in quite a difficult
way, yet it changes one's perspective on reality completely: what if
separation between _things_ (the table and your computer, or perhaps the
Pacific Ocean and that mosquito buzzing incessantly around your head between 2
and 3am) is simply an _illusion_?

In other words, what Bohm is suggesting is that _everything_, the whole
universe, free space included, is somehow all one dynamic process, which he
calls the _holomovement_: an _unbroken whole_.


###  The illusion of fragmentation

This is not a completely new concept however (think Eastern and Western
mysticism), but the way in which Bohm articulates it and relates it back to
Einstein's theory of relativity and quantum mechanics certainly is. I will
skip the discussion of that though (mainly because I could not understand
those chapters - they were far too technical). What I will mention quite
briefly is that you should look into the phenomenon of
[Bose-Einstein condensation](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bose%E2%80%93Einstein_condensate).
What the Bose-Einstein condensate means to me is this: when you cool matter
down to a certain temperature (a few billionths of a degree Kelvin above
absolute zero), it condenses into a new state of matter where all of the atoms
share the same quantum state, i.e. they occupy the same space and share the
same attributes.

Atoms occupying the same space? Surely not! We're taught that no two atoms
could ever possibly occupy the same space, because they're tightly-bound
little packets of _something_, and big packets of _something_ (such as
groceries) certainly can't all fit into the same space (in my car), so little
packets of _something_ also can't occupy each other's space?

Wrong. See the experimental evidence for it
[here](http://www.jstor.org/pss/2888436), if you can stomach the physics.


###  What does this mean for us?

So it at least appears as though _fragmentation_, or _separation_, is not
necessarily a true feature of this reality. But what does that mean for us in
our everyday lives? Let's talk practical philosophy.

Take a look at your hand: if we had to zoom into the very, very fine detail of
what's happening in your hand, we would get down to the sub-atomic scale of
things. What Bohm is saying is that we don't really know what's happening at
that level of detail - we haven't even begun to scratch the surface in terms
of understanding the _implicate order_ of the universe, in other words the
fundamental laws that govern the ways that things work. This is still as true
in 2011 as it was in 1980 when Bohm wrote the book.

Since we don't know what's happening at that scale of detail, do we really
know what's happening at a cellular scale? There does seem to be some order
there, because we've definitely managed to track what seems to be quite a few
repeatable patterns of cellular behaviour (e.g. mitosis), but we don't
completely understand what causes that order. Then, zooming out to the scale
at which we identify tissue, there are also a variety of processes that seem
to be repeatable and relatively stable (e.g. when we cut ourselves, we heal),
but since we don't know what's happening in the finer detail, do we really
understand what causes that order?


###  (A side-note on chaos)

Most people have heard about the
"[butterfly effect](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Butterfly_effect)".
The universe exhibits this strange tendency sometimes, under certain
circumstances, to amplify the tiniest little changes into large-scale ones, such
as where it might be possible for a butterfly to flap its wings in the United
States and cause severe storms in China some weeks or months later - this we
call _chaos theory_.

The relevance of this side-note is this: thinking of your hand again, if we
don't understand what's happening at the tiniest scale of detail, and the
universe does have this tendency to amplify the tiniest little disturbances
into big ones at larger scales of detail, then is it not possible that the
random itch you experienced on your thumb the other day was the result of the
bubbling up and interacting of a variety of extremely small-scale processes?

How much more so would this affect reality if a super small-scale process
bubbled up in your brain to trigger the collision of two thoughts that caused
you to ask your co-workers to have a meeting about possibly implementing a new
type of incentive scheme in the lower ranks of your company to potentially
improve productivity (and perhaps introduce a variety of unintended
consequences), potentially changing the way that hundreds of people go about
their daily lives?

Let's hope the universe isn't that fickle. We still haven't tackled the issue
of free will yet (and won't in this article, or any time soon, because I don't
have the foggiest idea of where to start on that one yet).


###  Thinking about understanding

Thinking about _what we understand_, if what Bohm is saying is true, then
_what we understand_, i.e. the content of our thought, or knowledge, is also
part of the holomovement. That means that the neural wiring in our brains and
the activity in that wiring is also part of this unbroken whole - attempting
to comprehend itself. What does this mean for those of us trying to understand
how _everything_ works? According to Bohm, you would have to be everything in
order to understand everything (something I don't see happening to me any time
soon).

Not only this, but understanding reality as _fragments_, i.e. that things
truly are separate, is merely a convenient way of thinking about things so our
heads don't explode from the sheer detail of what's going on right now.

So, do we give up on trying to understand things? No. Bohm says we need a new
way of looking at understanding: we need to be continually perceptive of
what's happening around us, and we need to be willing to update our mental
frameworks as reality around us changes.

We need to wake up, and stay awake, and refresh the language we use on a daily
basis (Bohm goes into great detail about the shortcomings of language -
something I hope to write about in relation to organisational dynamics
sometime soon).


###  Towards the mystical

This way of looking at reality seems to make a lot of sense to me. It also
fills me again with a sense of awe at the mystery of what's happening around
me on a daily basis (see
[this inspiring interview](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=PsgBtOVzHKI)
with Richard Feynman and the related ones). It also reminds me that, despite
various promises on the part of people or theory, full control and/or
understanding of reality doesn't seem as though it's ever going to be possible,
and I need to make peace with that in order to lead a less stressful life.

Other implications (generally practical ones) of this view of reality, which
many would call a "process-oriented" view of reality, will hopefully be
covered in future articles here.
