---
title: Money, freedom and entrepreneurship
slug: money-freedom-and-entrepreneurship
summary: 
date: 2012-06-18
tags:
  - entrepreneurship
  - freedom
  - money
  - philosophy
  - power
---
Lately I've been thinking about the role of money in society quite a bit, and
today I was thinking about it against the backdrop of entrepreneurship.



###  Money, Relationships and Freedom

On a philosophical level, it would seem to me as though money is a sort of
portable, tradeable representation of the amount of freedom that can
potentially be afforded to you by people you don't know.

Let me explain. When you walk into a shop, pick something up off the shelf,
and walk out without paying for it, what happens? If someone notices, they
call the police and you get hauled off to jail. If not, you walk out with a
free lunch. If, however, you give the person at the counter an appropriate sum
of money, the people in the store will allow you to walk out with the item, in
full view of everyone, without the threat of violence. You have traded some
paper and/or metal in exchange for that freedom, and thus money operates as a
(scarce/limited) social signalling mechanism.

In relationships however, ranging from those with acquaintances to family
members, people also afford each other freedoms. Hopefully one can go to one's
parents' house and take food from the fridge without the threat of someone
calling the police to carry you away. We allow each other freedoms in
relationship in quite a different way to the transactional freedoms allowed
through the use of currency.

This way of looking at money, for me at least, seems to clarify the real
trouble in trying to do business with friends and family, and the problem lies
in the following question: do I allow this person freedom based on the amount
of money they give me (effectively relegating the status of the relationship
to that possible with any stranger, and potentially belittling the
relationship if both parties are not exceptionally mature), or do I allow this
person freedom based on the depth of our relationship? It's a really tough one
that's probably best avoided, as I said, unless both parties are exceptionally
mature.



###  Entrepreneurship and Power

Thinking of money and power in the context of entrepreneurship, reflecting on
an essay by Malcolm Gladwell entitled [The Sure
Thing](http://www.gladwell.com/2010/2010_01_18_a_surething.html), he notes
that really successful entrepreneurs generally seem to have sizeable amounts
of money at their disposal prior to starting their venture, and that the risks
they appear to be taking are, to the entrepreneurs themselves, not really
risks at all - they're "sure things"; well-calculated risks.

Assuming you have a market for whatever you're selling, and you're happy with
the risk of your new venture, what is it about having a sizeable amount of
money (i.e. portable freedom) at your disposal that facilitates the creation
and success of such a new venture?

I'm willing to argue (as I did in my MBA thesis last year) that at the heart
of entrepreneurship lies the desire to challenge established power structures,
especially ones in the institution we currently call "business". Venture
success is somewhat attributable to innovation, but, as [this HBR
article](http://blogs.hbr.org/berkun/2008/07/why-innovation-is-overrated.html)
points out, I think our focus on innovation is overrated. I believe it's
primarily about offering people something that allows them to get what they
value, that is, to [make meaning](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=jSlwuafyUUo),
and then it's about finding ways to challenge and overthrow those already
providing people with ways to get the same value. [I mean, who's really come
up with a new **need** over the past few thousand years? Haven't people just
been coming up with new ways of satisfying long-standing needs? That's a point
for debate, I suppose.]

How is it that you overthrow someone in power? Well, if they have a lot of
followers, it's going to cost you a whole lot of money just to tell those
people that you can help them get what they value in a better way. If those
followers have a **relationship** with your competition (i.e. the followers
have real-world relationships with people who work for your competition), it's
going to be even harder and more expensive to convince them to leave the
competition. If those followers have a transactional arrangement with your
competition, however, it will be easier and cheaper. **Lesson number one that
I've taken from this line of thinking: get to know the competition's people,
your potential customers, and the dynamic between the competition and their
(your potential) customers**. If your competition's creating real value for
people, and they have great, healthy relationships with those people, you're
probably better off looking for another type of opportunity - this would be
the less risky route, in my opinion.



###  Entrepreneurship and Working From a Stable Base

I was reminded of a [blog
post](http://geniustypes.com/15_ways_to_stabilize_so_your_dreams_can_materialize/#)
I read last year, and some advice from a friend of mine to get a stable job
before attempting to start anything of my own again, and I've really been
thinking about the merits of building up some sort of stable base from which
to develop commercial ventures in the future. Of course, this isn't a
guarantee for success, but it seems like a less risky route to me - one which
I am in the process of trying to pursue. As an alternative to building up your
own capital, for example, you could rely on venture capital, but this means
making commitments to people that restrict your future freedom, so be very
careful about the nature of these agreements.

Building up a stable base financially, which can mostly only happen if you
have a good job for quite a while, will generally be linked to building up a
solid network of business relationships - people you can rely on to afford you
freedoms that you won't need to pay for, because of the nature of your
relationships with them. **Disclaimer:** be very careful of trying to worm
your way into people's lives and going out there in order to build
relationships with the "right" people. People can usually smell phonies from a
mile away. And this isn't a one-way thing: in real relationships, just as
others afford you healthy levels of freedom, you afford them healthy levels of
freedom too.

**The second lesson I've taken: put yourself into positions and situations to be able to build the right types of relationships should they occur, be open to new experiences and, above all, do it naturally - in a way that's in line with who you are**. As Gladwell pointed out in his book Outliers, success is one part hard work, and one part luck. The luck part, I suppose, is where hope and faith come in (what you choose to place that hope and faith in, of course, is up to you). 



###  The Danger of Risk-Aversion in Entrepreneurship

Once you become successful, you naturally become powerful in the eyes of your
employees. Really good entrepreneurs' success depends heavily on their ability
to quantify and minimise risk, and the tendency to gravitate toward
implementing strict processes and top-down control (enforced and facilitated
by people's perception of power in you as a successful entrepreneur) is
inevitable. There are alternatives to top-down control, but it means you have
to [let go of your perspective of your company as a
system](http://thanethomson.com/2011/11/25/the-trouble-with-systems/ "The
trouble with systems" ) and rather start thinking about it as relationships
between people. Traditional HR theory makes a clear case for [relational
psychological contracts rather than transactional
ones](http://www.alchemyformanagers.co.uk/topics/6ixdhhPwDvZFjsZc.html), and I
believe it's largely because of the special freedoms we afford each other in
relationships over mere monetary transactions.

**The third lesson I've taken from this line of thinking: genuinely get to know the people working with me**. 



###  Conclusion

At the end of the day, business (and thus entrepreneurship) obviously wouldn't
exist without people. And if money is one means of affording freedom to
individuals or groups of people, then business is just as much about those
freedoms and our complex relationship dynamics. It's really important then to
know people.

A good starting point to get to know others is, of course, to get to know
yourself (both getting to know others and yourself are processes, as you and
others are dynamic and change over time). As an entrepreneur, it's incredibly
important to know the people you work with (your employees), the people you
compete against (your competition), and the people for whom you're attempting
to create value (your customers).

I'm looking forward to experimenting with these ideas once, with some luck,
I've built up some stability for myself. I'll report back as I go, and welcome
any feedback on these concepts.

