---
title: Why online privacy is essential
slug: why-online-privacy-is-essential
summary: 
date: 2012-04-13
tags:
  - boundaries
  - privacy
  - social media
---
Psychology and philosophy have fascinated me since I was a kid, and I've read
tons of material on these subjects over the years. I've also seen quite a few
articles over the years talking about online privacy, and how easily we give
up private information via social media (for some random examples, see [this
article](http://psychcentral.com/news/2011/07/12/parents-also-share-private-
information-on-facebook/27661.html) and [this
one](http://www.cleveland.com/nation/index.ssf/2010/05/younger_people_rethink_what_pr.html)),
and having worked in digital media for a few years, where the more information
one can collect on a consumer the better for providing insightful feedback to
companies (on which they could eventually capitalise financially), it got me
thinking about online privacy and its relevance in society.

It's actually quite a simple matter: **healthy boundaries foster healthy
relationships** ([do a Google search for "healthy emotional
boundaries"](http://lmgtfy.com/?q=healthy+emotional+boundaries) and see the
first few links that come up).[  
](http://www.poets.org/viewmedia.php/prmMID/15719)

To understand boundaries though, one has to differentiate between information
that is **private** and information that is **secret**. As per [this
article](http://www.jung-at-heart.com/jung_at_heart/private-vs-secret-what-
is-t.html):

> Keeping something private is an act of choosing boundaries and staying
comfortably within them.

>

> Keeping something secret is an act of hiding from the pain of disclosing
something shameful.

>

> This difference centering around the feelings about the information which is
withheld is the principle factor in the difference between what is held
private and that which is secret. It is this element of shame or fear attached
to the secret that makes it different from something private.

What sort of society are we going to foster in the long run if small groups of
people (read: Google/Facebook/etc.) force larger groups of people (read: the
rest of the population) into situations where their personal boundaries are
continuously violated - usually without their knowledge and for the sake of
profits? See [this funny YouTube clip of the "G-Mail
man"](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=eFCSp23xl40). I'm personally not
comfortable with sending private information (note: I didn't say _secret_
information) via someone that stores that private information and uses it to
their personal gain without my consent.

If someone wants my private information, I want them to ask me for it and
respect me when I refuse to provide it (this is why I'm not on Facebook or
Google+: I don't see any way of using their services without my boundaries
being violated). Part of the problem, I think, is that companies don't want to
take the time to really explain to their customers what information they want
and how that allows them to create better products and services for them, and
ask their permission (in a way that the customers don't have to read through
pages of legalese) to have that private information.

This lack of respect for other people is incredibly unhealthy, in my opinion.
I think that privacy is a fundamental human need that we'll never get away
from, and we need to stand against those who disrespect that. Often even
governments will pass laws that will actively work against our need for
privacy.

What long-term damage will be caused to the fabric of society if personal
boundary violation were a continuous, legal, and often even profitable
activity? I think we have a complex and multifaceted problem here that's going
to need serious thought and attention, and a little heart, on the part of
those actively violating others' boundaries.

