---
title: Why science will never be able to tell us what something IS
slug: why-science-will-never-be-able-to-tell-us-what-something-is
summary: 
date: 2012-04-04
tags:
  - philosophy
  - reality
  - science
---
Every day we use numbers - they form the fundamental language of science,
which has allowed us to gain a tremendous amount of practical insight into our
world and how to exploit it to improve our lives. But is it possible to use
them to not only understand the _relationships between things_, but _what
things actually are_ as well?



###  A simple line of questioning

As per one of my other blog posts, I have a very simple line of questioning
here to illustrate the problem I've been thinking about.

> Q. I am currently holding an apple in my hand. For all practical purposes, I
know it's an apple, but what **is** it, actually?

>

> _A. The apple's made up of cells that were formed by the tree from which it
came._

>

> Q. Okay, but what **are** those cells?

>

> _A. The cells are made up of molecules, which are in turn made up of atoms._

>

> Q. But what **are** those atoms?

>

> _A. Atoms are made up of sub-atomic particles like protons, neutrons and
electrons. Those are then made up of quarks._

>

> Q. So what **are** those quarks?

>

> _A. Well, we have some theories about what quarks are made of..._

>

> Q. So what **is** that apple?

>

> _A. Like I said, we have some theories..._

So what is it that's preventing us from saying what something **is**?



###  The origin of "one"

Mathematics, I think, is a language just like English or German or French.
Think about the number **one**, for example. Where in the real world does the
number **one** actually exist? Nowhere - it's a concept in our heads. What I
think we're saying when we speak of **one apple** is the following: **"what I
am holding in my hand is stable enough to be considered distinct from its
surroundings"**.

What happens when you try to hold water in your hand? It spills out all over
the place. With regard to the little bit that you have left in your hand: do
you say that you have "one water" in your hand? Of course not! Without a
container, we cannot consider water to be a relatively stable, distinct entity
from its surroundings. If you place a certain amount of water into a jug
perhaps you would be able to call it **one litre** of water, but what you're
saying there is that the jug is of a standard, relatively stable size such
that it can contain a certain amount of water. The jug, then, is stable enough
to be considered distinct from its surroundings.

What's the point of this then? Well, what this means to me is that our concept
of **one** is derived from a visceral experience. The concept **two** is both
a logical extension of this experience and can also be a visceral experience
itself (I can hold one apple in each hand, thus holding two relatively
distinct clumps of matter). The number 10 billion, however, is quite a
different thing. Have you got a visceral understanding of what 10 billion is?
Have you ever been able to count 10 billion of something, such that you could
recognise 10 billion of that thing when you see it? I hope not - I would
imagine that to be a tremendous waste of time and energy.

So, numbers are derived from visceral experience - they are logical extensions
of the concept of **one**. In a similar fashion, fractions are extensions of
this visceral experience of **one**. We slice **one** apple up into two
pieces, and thus we (approximately) have two **halves** of an apple, and so
on.

[It's important to note here that I'm not discussing the historical roots of
the concept of "one" - I am sure that other people have researched this topic
extensively.]



###  Numbers as properties and mathematics as relationships

So, just like colour, or weight, or smell, **numbers are derived from
observable properties** **of physical phenomena - they are not the phenomena
themselves**.

Let me clarify that: when you say you have **one** apple, you are saying that
the clump of matter you are holding in your hand is relatively distinct from
its surroundings - you are describing properties of that clump of matter. The
concept **one** defines how well the matter sticks together in a relatively
stable form. In no way does it actually tell you **what the apple is**.



###  Mathematics as the language of science

It's a well-known fact that mathematics is the language of science. For
example, according to Newton's laws of motion, the displacement that an object
undergoes (_s_) is related to its initial velocity (_u_), its acceleration
(_a_), and the number of seconds for which it travels (_t_) by the following
equation:

> _s = ut + (1/2) a t2_

This is a mathematical equation that tends to hold true at relatively low
speeds for simple linear motion. Note how **this equation says nothing of the
object in question - it only defines the relationships between various
observable properties of the object**.

And why is it that it feels as though mathematics has an existence separate to
our own, as if it lives in a different world? (Sir Roger Penrose, in [The Road
to Reality](http://amzn.com/0679776311), calls this the "Platonic mathematical
world"). I think it's exactly because of the fact that **numbers and formulae
deal exclusively with properties of things, and not with the things
themselves**.

[All languages fail in their ability to describe what things
are](http://rickroderick.org/307-derrida-and-the-ends-of-man-1993/) - mainly
because, in simple terms, the word **apple** is not the apple itself. This
applies equally to mathematics.



###  What if things aren't really separate?

As per [this article](http://thanethomson.com/2011/11/08/reality-as-process/
"Reality as process" ) which I wrote last year on the work of David Bohm, we
have some evidence to show that "things" might not be as separate as they seem
to be. What if, for example, everything (the entire universe) were an unbroken
whole? Bohm calls this the Holomovement, and Pirsig calls it Dynamic Quality.
What would this do to the validity of mathematics if **one** apple wasn't
**really** distinct from its surroundings on a deeper level?

For all practical purposes, being an engineer myself, I think mathematics is
incredibly useful in helping us exploit our surroundings to our benefit. But
as for unlocking the deepest mysteries of the universe, I think it is only as
useful as any other language: in other words, not very useful at all. Towards
understanding reality then, I think that we need to start to relate to reality
in other (newer and older) ways in addition to languages (mathematical and
otherwise).

[Along this line of thinking, I would highly recommend reading "Zen and the
Art of Motorcycle Maintenance" and "Lila" by Robert Pirsig, as well as
"Wholeness and the Implicate Order" by David Bohm.]



###  Conclusion

So what hope is there then of science, in its present form which is heavily
reliant on the language of mathematics, being able to tell us **what things
are**? In my opinion: none.

And what's so important about knowing what things are anyways? Why don't we
just carry on with our lives, making the best of them with the understanding
that we've gained from science? That, I suppose is the more pertinent question
that arises from this essay. I personally think that to know what everything
is will tell us something very deep and fundamental, if not why we're here
then at least in which direction we should be heading. For all practical
purposes.

That's one thing science has never been able to tell me: which direction to
choose.

