---
title: On wanting to relinquish the desire to choose
slug: on-wanting-to-relinquish-the-desire-to-choose
summary: 
date: 2012-09-03
tags:
  - philosophy
  - choice
---
For a long time now I've been trying to figure out why it is that we've put so
much effort into coming up with new technologies and processes, such as
organisational processes. To me, a technology or a process seems as though
it's a tool (a static pattern of some sort) that attempts to facilitate the
pursuit and consumption of Quality in a repeatable way. I've been thinking a
lot about this in my context in the "Internet of Things" group at Meraka in
the CSIR, and in relation to traditional organisational thinking and
management theory.

Essentially, when we get ourselves into a particular situation, we want the
assurance that we will be able to move towards Quality without having to go
through the effort of making difficult choices: imagine if, every time you
wanted to fly, the airplane pilot had to manually decide the Best state of
every component in the aircraft. Commercial flight would obviously never be
possible.

In such a situation, it's important to remember that the conditions of the
situation for which we're developing technology, such as the aircraft, are
relatively predictable, even if they're complex or complicated. What happens
though when the conditions of a situation are simply unpredictable?

Now, juxtapose that question against the following one: if everything were
predictable, what would be the point of our ability to _choose_? We could of
course actively choose against Quality, but that would be the definition of
stupidity. Wouldn't life become incredibly boring if we could automate all of
our decisions for all situations?

There seems to be this innate tension in the universe between that which is
predictable and that which is unpredictable, and we need both (see [Tony
Robbins' TED talk on
this](http://www.ted.com/talks/tony_robbins_asks_why_we_do_what_we_do.html)).
Without some sort of predictability (e.g. if one couldn't predict whether or
not gravity would work the same way tomorrow as it does today), we would never
have enough of a sense of safety to be able to focus on higher, more complex
pursuits, and life as we currently know it wouldn't have been possible.
Without some sort of unpredictability, we would never be able to surprise
ourselves and so life would become bland.

The increasing trend toward technology and scientific understanding seems to
me to be an increasing desire towards providing stability and predictability.
Is such a movement Good, or does this merit some more thought?

I think we need to draw lines in the sand here (lines which can occasionally
be covered over and redrawn elsewhere) to say that we can only go so far in
our pursuit of predictability, and we need to come to embrace our desire to
make in-the-moment choices.

Against the backdrop of the "Internet of Things" and some people's desire to
automate everything in our lives, for me the thought of that automation scares
me. I fear it, not only because it genuinely removes predictability and makes
life boring, but because it tries to conceal a lie that says that one can
really reach ultimate predictability. In complex/chaotic systems, such as many
systems in (and perhaps even the entirety of) our universe, the smallest
simulation of the system becomes the system itself, and so simulation and
predictability become nonsensical. This lie might lull us into a false sense
of security where we relinquish the pain and joy of making decisions for
ourselves - not to a genuine static means of increasing our individual
experience of Quality in a repeatable way when the conditions are mostly
predictable, but to something that increases the individual experience of
apparent quality for a select few people (those who control the
technology/process) at our expense.

It is this lie which I need to expose, and about which we need to be honest
with ourselves and each other. We need to take up our courage for those
situations whose outcomes we cannot predict, and boldly make decisions for
ourselves. Not only that, but we also need to boldly push the boundaries in
terms of what we will allow ourselves to decide and where we will allow the
processes/technology to decide on our behalf.

How else will we lead fulfilling and meaningful lives?

