---
title: The Internet of Things and the fallacy of having no human intervention
slug: the-internet-of-things-and-the-fallacy-of-having-no-human-intervention
summary: 
date: 2012-10-19
tags:
  - choice
  - freedom
  - internet of things
---
In thinking about the pros and cons of standardisation in the field of the
Internet of Things, I stumbled upon a [project
report](https://www.comsys.rwth-aachen.de/fileadmin/papers/2011/2011-kai-
JITSR.pdf) where the authors claim that:

> The 'Internet of Things' (IoT) will represent a paradigm shift in
communication: initially, communication occurred between living beings. With
ICT, this was complemented, and some degree replaced, by communication between
humans and machines (e.g. through word processing), by communication between
humans enabled by machines (e.g. telephones or e-mail), and by machines
communicating with each other (e.g. in B2B e-business). The next step will see
communication between 'things' â€¦ without any human intervention.

This seems to be rather misguided thinking, and it's all too common in current
thinking related to the Internet of Things, which seems to be informed by a
paradigm that says that machines could one day look after our every need
(allowing us to [relinquish the "burden" of
choice](http://thanethomson.com/2012/09/03/on-wanting-to-relinquish-the-
desire-to-choose/ "On wanting to relinquish the desire to choose" )). Let's go
back to basics here for a moment: what exactly is the point of technology? For
me, it seems as though technology is **something that we use** in order to
improve our lives. The technologies we use generally depend on whether they
improve our lives in some way. For example, I'll use my mobile phone to
contact a loved one in order to assist in fostering connection and
relationship with them, which improves my life.

So there's an inherent flaw in someone's thinking here. I detect what's Best
for me - machines can't do that for me. I choose which machines I'm going to
use and how I'm going to use them in order to facilitate a quality situation
for myself, so there will always be human intervention at some point in the
use/configuration/reconfiguration of technology no matter how much the
machines talk to each other. For example, how could a machine possibly tell
whether I want a burger or sushi for lunch? The best thing the machines can do
is make it easier for me to figure out how to facilitate a quality situation
for myself (e.g. by telling me where to get what I want, and at the best
price). The idea that a machine could get into my mind, my internal
constitution, and detect and provide what's Best for me is incredibly far-
fetched, and I wouldn't want that anyway because it would take away what I see
as one of life's greatest gifts: **conscious and deliberate thought and
action, informed by my choices **(whether or not free will/choice is an
illusion is a debate for another time and place).

At best (technology-wise), we might be able to develop machines that would be
able to come together to detect what's Best for themselves. We know what that
would look like, of course: just go back and watch movies like Terminator or
the Matrix to remind yourself.

