---
title: Rethinking democracy
slug: rethinking-democracy
summary: 
date: 2012-03-23
tags:
  - democracy
  - emergence
  - metaphysics of quality
  - philosophy
  - quality
---
Nearly everyone I know seems to think that democracy is flawed, but the
problem is that we don't have a viable, practical alternative. What would it
take though to develop a practical alternative to democracy? I'm not
completely sure, but I'm quite positive about there being potential to find
such alternatives. This essay was inspired by a [talk by Bret
Victor](http://vimeo.com/36579366).



###  Paradigms

I think that the reason we haven't found such a viable alternative is because
the underlying paradigm from which we're viewing the challenge of our co-
existence is limiting. As Thomas Kuhn pointed out in [The Structure of
Scientific Revolutions](http://amzn.com/0226458083):

> A paradigm is a criterion for choosing problems that … can be assumed to
have solutions. To a great extent, these are the only problems that the
community will … encourage its members to undertake. Other problems … are
rejected as metaphysical … or sometimes as just too problematic to be worth
the time. A paradigm can, for that matter, even insulate the community from
those socially important problems that are not reducible to the [familiar]
puzzle form because they cannot be stated in terms of the conceptual and
instrumental tools which the paradigm provides.



###  My Paradigm Shift

My most significant personal paradigm shift (built on top of many other
paradigm shifts over the past few years) came after reading [Zen and the Art
of Motorcycle Maintenance](http://amzn.com/0061673730), and its sequel
[Lila](http://amzn.com/0553299611), by Robert Pirsig. Unless you have been
exposed to Pirsig's philosophy previously (the "Metaphysics of Quality") you
will most likely struggle to understand the remainder of this article. That is
the nature of paradigm shifts - your paradigm is the set of "mental pegs" onto
which you pin information as you attempt to make sense of the world. When
attempting to make sense of a particular phenomenon, should there be
information missing from one or more of those pegs, your attention shifts to
find things that could possibly fit onto those pegs. If you don't have the
pegs, as Kuhn pointed out, you won't look for information to pin to them, and
changing those pegs or adding new ones can often be rather painful because it
suddenly calls into question all of the other neat little collections we've
pinned to our old pegs.

To provide an incredibly brief summary of the Metaphysics of Quality: the
source of everything, absolutely everything in the universe, according to
Pirsig, is Quality. Quality is not an objective or a subjective phenomenon -
it is the source of subjects and objects, and exists at their interface.
Pirsig then divides Quality into static patterns of quality and Dynamic
Quality, where Dynamic Quality is the leading edge of experience: the here-
and-now. Dynamic Quality is all that there is, actually, but it can never be
grasped intellectually because, by the time we think about the here-and-now,
the here-and-now has already moved on. Pirsig has an amazing description of
how we see reality: _we sit, with our backs to the future, watching the past
unfold before us_. All we see is _relatively stable_ or _static_ patterns in
Dynamic Quality, referred to as "static patterns of quality". Pirsig divides
static quality into four levels: _**inorganic**_, _**biological**_,
_**social**_ and _**intellectual**_. The Metaphysics of Quality could be
outlined as in the following picture.

[![](http://thanethomson.com/wp-content/uploads/2012/03/Metaphysics-of-
Quality.jpg)](http://thanethomson.com/wp-content/uploads/2012/03/Metaphysics-
of-Quality.jpg)**Figure 1. Outline of the Metaphysics of Quality**

As mentioned in [this article](http://thanethomson.com/2012/03/23/why-is-
facebook-so-successful/ "Why is Facebook so successful?" ), biological
patterning (e.g. cells) cannot exist without inorganic patterning (i.e. atoms,
molecules); social patterning (see [this
article](http://thanethomson.com/2011/11/11/power-and-business/ "Power, and
business" )) cannot exist without biological patterning; intellectual
patterning cannot exist without social patterning (see [this
article](http://thanethomson.com/2011/11/10/mind-self-and-society/ "Mind, self
and society" ) for details on how intellectual patterning arises from social
patterning). This movement towards wholes that are in some way greater than a
sum of their parts is also referred to as
[Holism](http://thanethomson.com/2011/12/05/holism-and-cooperation/ "Holism
and cooperation" ). **Pirsig considers higher levels prevailing over lower
levels (the biological over inorganic, social over biological, intellectual
over social) as moral, and Dynamic Quality prevailing over static quality as
moral**.

If you've made it this far into the article and you haven't given up yet, I
have to congratulate you and also recommend that you read Pirsig's books for a
thorough treatment of how he got to this understanding. It's definitely worth
the effort.



###  Fresh Perspectives, New Research Avenues

I believe that we can come up with new ways of co-existing by looking at the
world from Pirsig's perspective, and one of the key components of that is an
understanding of [power and social
influence](http://thanethomson.com/2011/11/11/power-and-business/ "Power, and
business" ). I think that power, or social influence, is one of the major
dynamics governing _social patterning_, and we've been overlooking it for many
years now in favour of studying inorganic patterning (physics, chemistry,
etc.), biological patterning (biology), and intellectual patterning
(philosophy, and most of psychology it seems to me).

Surely, to understand how to best co-exist, we need to understand social
patterning?



###  What the Heck are "Equal Opportunity" and "Freedom"?

In much talk related to democracy, there's this concept of "equal opportunity"
that keeps popping up. What exactly do we mean when we talk about "equal
opportunity"? Some people seem to claim that it means that we must have the
_freedom_ to become whoever and whatever we want. What exactly is freedom
though? A number of authors have pointed out that it is an essentially
negative concept, defined in opposition to something else. Opposition to what?
If no other people existed in the world apart from you, you would be free to
do almost anything you _allowed yourself to do_, right? (Except, of course,
defy physical laws). So freedom is defined in terms of other people and
internally in relation to yourself.

**Thus, you are free if other people allow you to be free, and if you allow yourself to be free**. Who is it that allows you to be free? Those who are powerful over you, of course. People can coerce you into allowing them power over you by way of violence or the threat of violence and intimidation, or perhaps you identify with certain people you consider to be influential, or perhaps you allow someone to influence you by way of rational argument. 

What I think we really mean by "equal opportunity", which we haven't been able
to express until Pirsig gave us this new paradigm, is that **we want the
ability to challenge existing power/influence structures without the threat of
violence**.

To add some insight to the last part of that statement, I think that _law is
nothing but the threat of violence from existing authorities_. What is the
ultimate consequence of not obeying a particular law and blatantly defying the
authorities? It is violence: the death penalty, people forcing you to submit
to them by way of physical violence or otherwise eliminating you.

Not only this, but **democracy seems to me to be an institutionalisation of
the process of regularly allowing those who are not powerful to challenge
those who are powerful**. The powerful people allow those without power the
opportunity to challenge their power without the threat of violence, as
democracy is inherently legal in such systems. Democracy is therefore
definitely an instance of the principle about which I am talking in this essay
(having the ability to challenge existing power/influence structures without
the threat of violence), but is it the only one? What obvious shortcomings
does it have that will need to be remedied in the next "version" of our co-
existence strategy?



###  The Fear of Freedom: the Fatal Flaw in Democracy

Taken at face value, the principles enshrined in our current idea of democracy
seem desirable, but there is an inherent flaw in its implementation and
execution. Erich Fromm wrote a book quite some time ago entitled [The Fear of
Freedom](http://amzn.com/0415253888), in which he described our innate fear of
being truly free. As people grew in an understanding of their individuality,
they started to fear the loneliness that accompanied it, and so they would
generally rather give up that freedom to another in order not to be alone. If
enough people give up their freedom to one single person, that person becomes
an incredibly powerful, influential individual. Several examples of this are
available from history, with the rise of Hitler, of course, being the most
prominent. People simply gave up their own freedom to avoid the isolation (in
not belonging to the group) which accompanies holding onto their freedom, and
eventually had to give up their freedom to avoid violence.

Fromm's solution to this problem is to forge on in the development of one's
individuality until one has the capacity to **relate to the world through the
spontaneity of love and productive work**. How practical is such a state of
existence for the average man on the street, whose isolation grows every day
in an increasingly disconnected, complex society such as ours? I think it's a
pipe dream. What alternatives are available to us though?



###  The Market Economy Model

The great thing about the principle of _being able to challenge established
authorities without the threat of violence_ is that, being a principle, it can
be used as a lens in a variety of contexts. Think of it in relation to the
market economy: those companies that perform the best are the ones that
deliver what their customers want (money, as a friend of mine once stated, is
one type of portable representation of power). If we discover that they are
not acting in our best interests, we remove power from them by way of not
purchasing their products, or selling our shares in their companies,
effectively reducing or eliminating their power.

Is there perhaps a lesson in the example of the market economy that can be
extended to governing a country? Perhaps, but we have to acknowledge the
dangers in such a situation. Once again, most people suffer from groupthink,
and are all to eager to give up their freedom (read: power, influence, money)
in exchange for being part of a group. What happens when too many people give
too much power to one individual or small group of individuals, crossing that
invisible threshold? Two words: [Animal Farm](http://amzn.com/0452284244).



###  Challenging Authority

So let's think about the mechanisms by which people challenge authority, and
the common path followed by these people. One of the small-scale mechanisms of
removing power from individuals is gossip (see [this
article](http://thanethomson.com/2011/11/11/power-and-business/ "Power, and
business" )). Gossip acts on reputation, and reputation is probably the
fundamental "currency" or "backbone" of social patterning. Unfortunately it
only exists in people's heads, and is very difficult to quantify into
something portable like money. It takes much time to be built up, and can be
destroyed very quickly by careless chatter (hence the old adage: "if you can't
say anything nice about someone, don't say anything at all" - a static
intellectual pattern showing that we've learned, as a society, about the long-
term impacts of carelessness in social patterning). Although, gossip can be
useful in dealing with corrupt, yet influential individuals: newspapers
publish stories on such corruption, and then people natter about it over
dinner with friends, at the office with colleagues, etc. This is a key
mechanism to our survival as a species. Without it, we would not be able to
identify, track and then root out the unsustainable, harmful elements in our
midst.

But what happens on a larger scale when it comes to removing power from
individuals or groups of individuals? I think of it as in the somewhat-
archetypal diagram below.

[![](http://thanethomson.com/wp-content/uploads/2012/03/authority-hero-
challenge.jpg)](http://thanethomson.com/wp-content/uploads/2012/03/authority-
hero-challenge.jpg)**Figure 2. Establishment of new authorities**

This is blatantly evident in the political scene in certain emerging economies
and throughout history in the tales of kings and kingdoms, but it is also
evident in business. Microsoft establishes itself as an authority, and Google
arises to challenge it, to a certain extent overcoming it, and becoming the
new authority. Facebook then emerges to challenge Google, overcomes it to a
certain extent, and establishes itself as a new authority. Round and round we
go, and where are we ultimately heading? According to Pirsig, _we are heading
towards Quality_.



###  Efficient, Effective Allocation of Power

As I mentioned before, I don't personally have a model yet for how we should
conduct ourselves, but I feel that this line of thinking could be fruitful in
developing such a model. What I do know, because we will never rid ourselves
of power/social influence dynamics, and people, on average, will probably take
many decades to come to accept their individuality, is that the model will
have characteristics that **lay out a framework for co-existence that allows
for the efficient, effective allocation of power towards the sustainability of
the human race**.

Such a model will need to be re-evaluated regularly to ensure its relevance.



###  Living Close to Dynamic Quality

The whole point of such a principle, as outlined in [Bret Victor's
talk](http://vimeo.com/36579366), is to allow one to live as close to Dynamic
Quality as possible, as I believe that the whole cycle in Figure 2 is only
necessary because the establishment of an authority represents the
establishment of a set of static patterns, and then the re-establishment of
new static patterns more in line with changing circumstances. The more static
patterns in which one gets trapped, the greater the chances of potentially
veering away from Dynamic Quality and thus towards inevitable destruction. It
is inherently moral, however, to live closer to Dynamic Quality.

To live close to Dynamic Quality, one must be willing to continually re-
evaluate and interrogate one's static patterning - especially intellectual
patterning such as a new framework to replace democracy (this is where I find
the postmodern/poststructural movement so valuable). It seems to me that, the
simpler the principle, the less often it needs to be updated to keep in line
with Dynamic Quality. The new framework must thus allow for the framework
itself to be challenged, just as the Metaphysics of Quality itself is open to
being challenged.

[The ultimate principle, I believe, is simply "love", in the Agape sense:
"seek that which is best for yourself and others." "Best" here implies a
movement with and towards Dynamic Quality. It is quite difficult to
operationalise such a principle, and it seems to me as though each generation
needs their own operationalisation principle derived from the "love"
principle. My aim in writing this essay is to stimulate thought towards the
development of an operationalisation principle for our current generation,
because I believe that the principles that are currently in place are too
complex and are tainted by too many individuals' immoral agendas.]



###  Developing Individuality

Fromm's proposal of relating to each other and the world through the
spontaneity of love and productive work is certainly practical, and forces one
to live in very close proximity to Dynamic Quality, but only once one has
reached a certain level of development of one's self to be able to cope with
such proximity and the loneliness through which one must first pass (almost as
a rite of passage). It is this that we should be focusing on in our education
system - not just teaching children static intellectual patterns, but actually
**facilitating the development of their individuality**. People need to be
encouraged in as many ways as possible to think for themselves (allow
themselves the freedom to think their own thoughts). This, I believe, is
already taking shape in the postmodern/poststructural movement, and needs to
be encouraged.



###  Conclusion

To recap: my own paradigm shift came about after reading Pirsig's
philosophies, allowing me to place more emphasis on social phenomena such as
power and social influence than has previously been emphasised. In thinking
about new ways of co-existing (rather than "new systems of government"), I
believe that Pirsig's perspective is not only practical, but necessary for the
long-term sustainability of humanity.

We have moved past the point where a single individual or small group of
individuals should be able to unjustifiably hold on to power for extended
periods of time, and many people have been growing in their own individuality
and confronting the lonely path associated with that growth. We are currently
entering a period of tremendous uncertainty, given the complexity of
globalisation and increasing interdependence amongst different groups of
people.

I dare say we are entering a period of human history where Humanity will take
on a mind and character of its own, if it has not already, and the individual,
like a cell in a body, will not be capable of understanding the mind and
character of that superorganism - let alone controlling it. Any attempts at
centralised control will result in tremendous destruction and suffering. All
that is left for the individual, therefore, is to do that which is best for
him/herself and those with whom he/she interacts (relating to the world
through the spontaneity of love and productive work), and allow Dynamic
Quality, with which the vast majority of people are already practically
acquainted, to guide Humanity toward Itself.

