---
title: Innovation and Happiness
slug: innovation-and-happiness
summary: 
date: 2015-04-13
tags:
  - happiness
  - innovation
  - philosophy
  - quality
---
What, exactly, is value? Or, in a less philosophical way: how is it that you
practically know when you have experienced something of value?

From my experience so far, I believe that our experience of value is deeply
related to our true emotions and feelings, and is thus rooted in our common
humanity. Building on what I've [written about previously on
innovation](http://thanethomson.com/2014/11/17/the-challenge-of-innovation/
"The Challenge of Innovation" ) (innovation being the simultaneous movement
towards **new** and **better**) our entire perception of "value" and "better"
is inextricably intertwined with our emotional experience of our world. In
this perspective, being able to make ourselves happy is a precondition to
being able to make others happy, and this includes how we craft products,
services and experiences for others.

Let me explain.



###  Our Emotions

We, as human beings, have a limited number of emotions that we can experience
and that motivate us to action. Opinions differ as to what those emotions are,
but [one popular
perspective](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Emotion#Basic_emotions) is that they
include **happiness**, **anger**, **fear**, **sadness**, **disgust**,
**guilt** and **surprise**. As practical experience tells us, we can
experience these emotions to different levels of intensity. We can also
experience several emotions simultaneously, because our brains are highly
complex, interconnected webs of living cells, all interacting simultaneously.

The [regions of the brain that deal with
emotions](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Limbic_system) are quite close to the
centre of the brain - closer, in fact, than the [regions of your brain that
are responsible for our rational, critical thinking
processes](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cerebral_cortex). The centre of the
brain is, of course, closer to the mid-brain and spinal cord, and, thus, it
can be conjectured that emotions are more powerful movers of our selves than
our rational thoughts. Think about this for yourself: are you more likely to
be moved to action by an appeal to your emotions, or by an appeal to your
logic? Are you very easily able to commit and see through your New Year's
resolutions, or do you give up on them within a few short weeks (like most of
us)? I suppose the answer to that will depend on how much discipline you have
over your emotions, and how in touch you are with your emotions.

How dull would life be if you only lived by way of logic, ignoring all of your
feelings of happiness, sadness, fear, anger, and so on? Emotion and logic both
have their place in our daily lives, and wisdom involves knowing which to give
precedence at the right time.

How is it, though, that emotions could possibly lead us to experience what we
deem to be "valuable"?



###  Emotions and Value

What are the things that facilitate happiness for you, personally? Are those
not the things that you consider valuable? [Tony Robbins speaks of the things
that motivate us as human
beings](https://www.ted.com/talks/tony_robbins_asks_why_we_do_what_we_do?language=en),
listed here for convenience:

  1. **Certainty/safety** - I need to feel safe now, and that I will feel safe in the future. 
  2. **Uncertainty/variety** - I need to experience new things and encounter unexpected challenges or experiences (note how this contradicts our first need). 
  3. **Significance** - I need to feel as though I am significant to another person. 
  4. **Love/connection** - I need to feel as though I am loving others and am loved by others, and/or connected to others. 
  5. **Growth** - I need to feel as though I am growing and developing as a human being in all of my various spheres. 
  6. **Giving** - I need to feel as though I am giving back to others in a meaningful way. 

The first four needs are basic needs that everyone has and will find some way
of meeting, regardless of how healthy or sustainable those ways are. Very few
people seem to get to the point in their lives where they realise that they
_need_ the last two things: to grow personally, and to give to others. It is,
in fact, a _need_ of ours to give to others in meaningful ways! This is,
however, quite difficult if you have not yet found healthy ways of having your
other, more basic needs met first.

The degree to which we experience those different needs is different for each
and every one of us. Some of us need more variety and uncertainty or
excitement than others. Some of us have a greater need for significance than
others. And others still have a greater need for personal growth. The
intensity of each of those needs also varies over time, depending on what's
going on in our lives.

Think, for example, of a situation where, on a rather average day at work, you
feel hungry. You start looking around for new something to eat at the
cafeteria (it would be "valuable" to you right now to ensure your own
longevity and satisfaction by eating something, but you also want a bit of
variety), when all of a sudden the fire alarm goes off and people start
running and screaming around you as smoke fills the corridors. Immediately,
your priorities shift to a different kind of bodily safety or certainty. The
last thing you'd probably be thinking of right now is food, or, for that
matter, connecting with other people in meaningful ways or about your career
growth path (if you're laughing at this picture right now, it most certainly
highlights the practical absurdity of thinking of inappropriate needs for the
situation). Your immediate perception of what's "valuable" shifts to
preserving your own life, and you too probably start to run towards safety.

Similarly, your needs shift and change as you go through different phases of
your life. When you are young and unattached, you generally have a greater
need for uncertainty and variety - to go explore the world and its various
options. The moment that you start to "settle down" and start having children,
your priorities may start to shift a bit more towards providing you and your
loved ones with greater safety. As the children leave the house, you may start
once again engaging in hobbies that you have neglected for a long time, and
perhaps go back to school, as growing as a person again becomes a focal point
for you. As you grow, you also start realising that you have a desire to give
back, and so start volunteering at a local shelter, or volunteering to teach
others. (This is, of course, a highly stereotypical view, and is not
necessarily the healthiest approach to life - that is up to you to discover
for yourself).

In all of these examples, _it is in the meeting of these fundamental needs of
ours that we **experience** what we intuitively call **"value"**_. That is, of
course, given that we're doing so in healthy ways. And how is it that we know
that these needs of ours are or are not being met? Through our emotions, of
course! We usually tend to feel happy once our needs have been met, and
happily surprised when met unexpectedly. We tend to feel angry, sad or
disappointed, or disgusted when they are not met. We tend to feel guilty when
we act in ways that hurt others and go against the meeting of our own needs.
(An important caveat here: this is not always the case though. When we come
from dysfunctional relational backgrounds or have experienced a lot of pain
and suffering at the hands of others in our past, our emotional responses to
the world need to be taken with a pinch of salt. Psychotherapy is an
incredibly effective tool in helping to sift our _true_ feelings/emotions from
those generated by [PTSD](http://www.nimh.nih.gov/health/topics/post-
traumatic-stress-disorder-ptsd/index.shtml)).





###  Meeting Our Own Needs

Part and parcel of our highly dysfunctional society today is the lack of being
able to meet our own needs in healthy ways, while trying to meet the needs of
others, thinking that if we meet their needs then they'll meet ours. This is a
particular pattern of dysfunction that sets in in early childhood when parents
cannot meet the needs of their children, and children assume that they have to
teach their parents to how look after them (an oversimplification of
codependency theory, I know). Unfortunately, their parents are so disconnected
from themselves and their own emotions that there is no way that they would be
able to be in touch with the emotions of their children. Children then
preoccupy themselves with their external environments and external
distractions, never really learning to be in touch with their own emotions,
and so the cycle is perpetuated through the generations. As adults, we
preoccupy ourselves with trying to please everybody around us (colleagues,
managers, friends, partners) so they will like us and maybe, just maybe, they
will help us meet our needs. Unfortunately, meeting one's own needs is a full-
time job for one person, and so the chances of them catering to your needs
will be very slim.

This pattern of dysfunction is incredibly common nowadays, and is especially
evident by how much codependency, addiction and abuse (physical and emotional)
there is in the world today - our world of endless, instantly available
distractions. We need to bring ourselves to a standstill, before life does
this on our behalf in the form of catastrophe, and recognise that we need to
take up full responsibility for having our own needs met and for our own
happiness. This, of course, does not mean that we have full control over
having our needs met, such as in the example of connectedness and love, where
one cannot possibly control another person into loving you or being friends.
All we can do is adjust ourselves, and rationally put ourselves in the best
position we can to be able to have those needs met, and then be okay with
being dependent on another person as they could be on you.

I say all of this because, before we can actually give back to others in
meaningful, healthy ways, we have to be able to give to ourselves in healthy,
meaningful ways.



###  Innovating Through Empathy

Once we are regularly in touch with and can meet our own basic needs by
creatively coming up with ways of finding happiness in healthy ways, we can
then start to look at meeting the needs of others in healthy ways (which, as
said earlier, happens to be one of our own personal needs). By being in touch
with oneself, knowing oneself and how to work with your own emotions, you can
build up your ability to _empathise_ with others. This allows you to feel what
they feel, as if you were in their shoes. By being well-versed in looking
after yourself and your own needs, you can then more easily help them find
ways to have their own needs met.

This is especially relevant and pertinent in a business context. If we, as
individual human beings (who happen to be employees as well), are out of touch
with ourselves, how could we possibly be crafting products, services or
experiences for other people that will make them happy enough, by way of
having their needs/desires met, that they will pay you their hard-earned money
and keep coming back to you for those offerings?

Coming back to the idea that **innovating** is about the simultaneous movement
towards things that are both **new** and **better**, there is the underlying
sense that it requires both creativity and an understanding of what's
_valuable_. Thinking only about the _value/better_ aspect, my reasoning, as
explained above, is that being in touch with your own emotions as guides as to
what's valuable to _you_ will allow you to come up with ways of structuring
your life to facilitate greater happiness for yourself. This is the primary
way in which you will be able to empathise with others and help to give them
that which is valuable to them.



###  Conclusion

It would appear to me as though innovating on behalf of others and our own
personal happiness and fulfilment are inextricably interwoven. We cannot
separate our humanity from the business world, because our business, as human
beings, is the business, challenge and art of finding and facilitating
happiness in a challenging, dynamic world, for ourselves and others. The way
in which we help others find happiness through our products, services and
experiences, is for us to first find ways of making ourselves happy - a
journey on which our true emotions and feelings will be our guides.

Commit yourself to making yourself happy, and being the only person in your
life who is truly and ultimately responsible for your own happiness, and you
will see that, within a few short months, you will be more capable of seeing
what's valuable for yourself and others. You will also be more capable of
facilitating the happiness of others in healthier, more sustainable ways, and
in so doing meet your own need to give back to others.

The rest of the challenge of innovating is in being able to facilitate the
"new" - a topic which most certainly deserves its own special treatment.

