---
title: On (White) Privilege
slug: on-white-privilege
summary:
date: 2015-03-02
tags:
  - apartheid
  - power
  - privilege
  - racism
  - social influence
---
"Irked" is the best way I could describe my feeling after reading a recent
[opinion piece](http://mg.co.za/article/2015-02-23-six-things-white-people-
have-that-black-people-dont) on the Mail &amp; Guardian's site on the topic of
"white privilege" in South Africa. It took me a while to understand why,
exactly, I felt this way, but I've since established that it has a lot to do
with the confusion I see in the public discourse here in South Africa between
ethnicity and power (where "privilege" could be viewed as a sub-theme in the
over-arching theme of "power" in society).

I want to make a recommendation here in attempting to shift the public
discourse, in whatever little way I can, to help towards building a non-
racially segregated South Africa. Is this not what people have been fighting
for for decades now? It seems pretty obvious to me that the more we talk about
each other and classify each other by our skin colour, the more we will
continue to perpetuate the racial segregation of our past. But if we can't do
that any more, how then do we talk about each other, to each other? This way
of thinking seems to be so deeply embedded in our national psyche that we
aren't even aware of it any more. The current lens that we, as South Africans,
use to look at our world is thoroughly broken along the wholly artificial
lines of the colour of our skin.

It is, I believe, entirely possible to look at each other with the same whole,
un-segregated lens: one which looks at us all as **human beings**. This lens
will obviously not solve our problems, but I believe it will at least help to
contextualise and dissect our problems in a more humane, un-segregated way,
and could, perhaps, give rise to creative solutions that work towards what's
best for all of us, that don't take skin colour into account.



###  Our tainted past

I cannot and would not want to deny the reality that some of my ancestry that
lived through, and possibly even perpetuated, highly prejudiced times. I am
not aware of any of my direct ancestry who were involved in perpetuating any
of the brutality of the apartheid era, but I am aware of some who still, to
their dying day, held subconscious racist views (contradictory to their overt
treatment of people of other ethnicities). These views naturally escaped in
conversations, especially in regard to their opinions on the country and its
direction.

Being an outsider myself in many ways, I've often gone overboard in my
attempts to empathise and try to identify with others, which has its pros and
cons. I feel ashamed at times: on behalf of my direct ancestry, and of my
entire people group. I know I shouldn't feel ashamed, because I was born into
this situation and wasn't at all guilty of furthering any aspect of the
apartheid era, but I do feel that way. Those were very shameful things that
they did to their fellow men and women. I feel especially ashamed, enraged and
disappointed when I hear of racially motivated attacks **still** continuing in
South Africa today. It baffles me how we, as a country, proclaim our "rainbow
nation" status at every gala event and press conference we can, touting our
Madiba caps and shirts as if to try to brand ourselves somehow, yet
hypocritically still segregate people in our hearts, minds and policies (at
all levels) based on the colour of their skin. Our collective, unconscious
hypocrisy inevitably slips through - a perfect example being the [article in
question](http://mg.co.za/article/2015-02-23-six-things-white-people-have-
that-black-people-dont).

How, then, do we look at ourselves in an _all-encompassing_ way?



###  It's about power and symbols of power

Let's first assume the obvious: that **we're all human beings**. Let us openly
acknowledge to ourselves every morning that, regardless of the colour of
another person's skin, and whether or not we agree or disagree with them, they
are also a human being, just as we ourselves are.

Then, let's admit to ourselves that the themes of power, influence and
privilege are rooted in our human nature. **The colour of my skin is not the
_cause_ of my own power/influence/privilege**. It seems obvious when stated
explicitly, but you would be amazed at how this crazy assumption - a
completely irrational scar of our racially segregated past - has permeated
South African society. We are human beings, and groups of human beings have
gone to war with each other, for all we know, since we started being human
beings or even before then. It's so much easier to use violence to _take_
power/influence/privilege than it is to earn it.

Ask a person of Sotho or Tswana descent about people of Zulu descent, and they
will tell you that people of Zulu descent are notoriously violent human
beings. One merely has to peek into their cultural history to see this for
oneself. This even gives them a certain status to this day: I have spoken to
Sotho- or Tswana-speaking people who tell me that, if they start speaking
Sotho or Tswana, and someone replies in Zulu, they find it customary to
continue the conversation in Zulu because of Zulu people's violent reputation.
Is this also not a form of privilege perpetuated in cultural practice by way
of violent history? The identifying _symbol_ of power here is the language
spoken.

In another example, I have driven around in townships such as Alexandra
before, where it's customary to, when one sees an oncoming luxury vehicle,
move out of the way so that they can pass by. I have not yet heard an
explanation for this, but it is a privilege that is culturally entrenched at
this point in time in that community. Here, the _symbol_ of power or privilege
is the type of car the person is driving.

In the examples of the theme of "white privilege", the _symbol_ of power is
the colour of one's skin. There are probably innumerable similar examples from
cultures and societies around the world and throughout history, where such
symbols of power have risen and fallen over time. This is possibly what the
author of the [article in question](http://mg.co.za/article/2015-02-23-six-
things-white-people-have-that-black-people-dont) was alluding to, but failed
to do so in a non-racial way.

The common thread in all of these examples is that of **power/influence**.
This is, to reiterate, a fundamentally _human_ thing. It is deeply embedded
into the fabric of how humanity works, how societies are formed and unformed,
and will most likely be with us for as long as there is one human being in
interacting proximity of another.



###  A healthier way to look at power

Thinking about power and influence seems rather amoral at times, and possibly
even immoral if actively pursued. There are reasons for this that are
significant, but they are not relevant to the discussion at hand and I would
have to diverge wildly to discuss this. Unfortunately, even connotations of
power and influence are tainted by the almost visceral understanding each of
us has of the history of its abuse in human society, from the greatest
atrocities down to everyday bullying in primary schools.

There are glimmers of hope though, because of the two very different ways in
which power or influence or privilege are obtained. The main reality to
recognise is that **my influence on you sits in your mind**. You are the one
who does or does not give me influence over you. You either allow me to
influence you because you are afraid of me, or because you trust me.

The only healthy way to deal with power, actually, is to let it go. By that I
mean that we have to continuously, in a highly disciplined fashion,
acknowledge that, if you genuinely deserve power, other people will give it to
you. The only other option is to take it by way of violence (overtly or
subversively, and even emotional manipulation could be viewed as a form of
violence here) - this is a non-option, in my opinion. Unfortunately history
has shown that we human beings are lazy and would rather exert violence or the
threat of violence as a quick and high probability way to gain power. This,
rather than taking the long and arduous road less travelled of doing good for
ourselves and others simultaneously, creatively working hard towards win-win
situations.



###  Moving forward

I cannot and will not deny the possibility that lighter coloured skin is still
a symbol of power of some sort in South Africa, whether because of fear or
because of trust, just as I cannot deny the existence of other symbols of
power or influence in our various cultures and subcultures. I also cannot and
will not deny the detestable things that we, as human beings, have done to
each other throughout history.

We need a new lens - an integrated, undivided way of looking at our world so
that we can move forward toward a healthier tomorrow. This lens, again, I
believe, is rooted in a very simple, practical view that we are all human
beings. We all have hopes, dreams, afflictions, fears. We all prosper and
suffer from the underlying, unspoken dynamics of power and influence and
privilege in our societies. We all prosper and suffer in different ways from
our violent tendencies, past and present, as a species.

We need to bring to light the dividing lines between us, questioning them
relentlessly and with all ferocity, exposing them for the lies that they are.
We need to learn to do good to ourselves, and each other, simultaneously. We
need to learn to trust each other, and in healthy ways. We need to acknowledge
our humanity and the capacity for good and evil, edification and abuse, giving
and greed, love and fear, that lies in each and every one of us because of
_that very same humanity_. We need to acknowledge that the dynamics of power
and influence, and therefore privilege, are inextricably woven into our
humanity.

How irrelevant, then, is the colour of one's skin in comparison to our present
task of having to be ever-vigilant of this humanity that courses through each
and every one of us, every day, in every interaction we have with each other?
